# Soothe, A Stress Management Application
Satyam Malhotra, Fall 2025
## Abstract
This paper will present methods for building Soothe, an open-source stress management app designed to help the younger generation manage their stress levels and overall mental health. This app consists of many features and updates to make the user feel as good as possible. The app has many layers that contain large amounts of data, with frequent updates over months/years. Along with its multiple layers, Soothe consists of over 10 people working closely to provide the best care we can to our users. Whether it concerns user feedback, personalized recommendations, or the interface experience, our team is always available. To build out this open-source project, it all stems from the project management education received from Mr. Alicea. With knowledge of workflow maps, understanding of technical debt, definition of user needs, and community feedback, Soothe will be able to help millions of people worldwide manage their stress and lead more relaxing/productive lives.
## Introduction/Background
Being a senior at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign I have been majoring in  Information Sciences and Psychology. Before adding an Information Sciences major, I was solely a Psychology major with a clinical concentration. I have always been fascinated with mental health and how it affects different demographics of people. As college students, we live quite stressful lives with classes, assignments, part-time work, and extracurriculars, while also trying to lead productive social lives. Many college students strive to be the best versions of themselves they can be throughout their collegiate careers, and with that comes an abundance of stress. Being one of those college students, I wanted to build an app that not only students but also people in the workplace can use whenever they feel overly stressed. This app offers a variety of features (which will be explained), and my goal is for people to lead more productive lives while being just a little less stressed. With the amount of day-to-day tasks many people have to endure, this app ensures that, even through the harder tasks, we can deliver a calming environment where everyone can feel safe.
College students are prone to stress due to the transitional nature of their adjustment to the rudiments of higher education programs (Bulo & Sanchez, 2014). When looking at people entering the workforce, similar findings are reported, stating that young employees typically require extensive task support to perform well and adjust to the workplace (Nowak, 2023). This can come from a variety of factors, but not limited to controlling supervisors, negative feedback during work, and overall trying to adjust to a new system (Nowak, 2023). I also surveyed during my Junior year of college to see whether the University community, specifically undergraduate psychology students, is mainly stressed or not. The findings show that most college students are stressed! Having these findings and being a student myself, it is not hard to understand the stress students, and people in general, feel daily.
## Project Vision/Open Source Implementation
The goal of this project is to bring a friendly, modern look to a stress management app that college students or early workforce employees can use to help them with their daily lives, to help with their stress in meaningful ways. While the app is intended for everyone, the main demographic will be 18-35-year-olds. This way, we can understand this age demographic to the fullest so then we can add features and build off that understanding for all ages. To continue, this project will be divided into 3 phases. Phase one will consist of all the planning efforts in the first 6 months to eventually roll out the app. Phase 2 will be the next 6 months of app building to release a beta version that inevitably leads up to the first-ever app launch. Phase 3 will focus on the first year after the app launches and examine the positives and negatives of Soothe.
For phase one, planning took about 6 months before even starting on the app. This included the number of team members needed, budgeting, sending out surveys, and how the app will be coded. For the team, we will have the co-founder and I, as well as a highly trained scrum master, project manager, business analysts, a director of product planning, and all the engineers necessary to build out the app. After establishing this team, budgeting will be stretched out over the course of a year, all handled by the project manager. Their role is to attract new investors who want to invest in Soothe. To continue, the scrum master will ensure everyone is following agile frameworks and staying on track with the app build. It is also the project manager’s job to send surveys to many colleges and companies to understand what would be most beneficial in a stress management app, who would use it, and which features would be best for each individual. Lastly, we need to ensure all features for the beginner rollout are in place and that all engineers are highly qualified in Java. A key theme in Mr. Alicea’s teaching is that collaboration is essential to ensure a successful project.  After 6 months, the planning has commenced, and we are ready to create Soothe. This app will take about 6 more months to create for phase 2.
Onto Phase 2, we are looking at the next 6 months to fully build out the app. So far, the app's features include a biometric tracker, an easy-to-use interface, the ability to change the app's color based on mood, and personalized meditation videos tailored to each individual. By adding these features, we wanted to ensure the app's domain was comfortable for users, so we implemented an open-source display as taught by Mr. Alecia. This allows users to modify the source code to create their own personalized app. Having an open source also allows for better data transparency between the user and company, as well as keeping their data secure and private. Users can actively support data integration within the app by having an open-source network. They can create incentives for new investors when larger companies want to fork your project (Alicea, 2025). Having this ability allows our company, the creator of Soothe, to license this data, so more companies want to be a part of our app. People are generally too scared of their data being stolen easily. Having this type of software allows our company to be open with our clients without penalty.
For phase 3, after viewing what these features and having an open source network have done to the app in about a year and a half has been amazing. Based on the immense user feedback we have received, we have led to positive results. Throughout the year the app has been out, we have implemented a framework called the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM). This theory explains how users can come to accept technology based on two key factors: usefulness and ease of use. By understanding these two core elements, our team was able to implement this theory in our app to ensure it hits those two keypoints. By combining the TAM theory with an open source, we believe it is the best opportunity for our users to have the most engaging experience with our app. By combining usefulness, an easy-to-use interface, and transparency, Soothe allows users to feel safe using an app that protects their data and helps them live a less stressful life. While these are great results from the app, there are some downsides. The two main issues of concern for the user are biometric inaccuracy and user dependency. Are users even using the app when they are stressed? While the positives are far more prevalent than the downsides, it is important to understand them when they arise. When talking about future pathways/improvements, these problems will be addressed.
## Demographics/Audience
For the first couple of years of app development and rollout, the target audience will be primarily college students and early-entry workforce employees. This is because being a college student and trying to get into the workforce out of college, it is an extremely difficult time to not only acquire a job but also be at a corporate job, especially in technology. With this first-hand knowledge, the company should target our demographics, then branch out. Our target is 18-35 year olds who are in a college/work setting, trying to do better with their mental health/stress levels. We have sent out surveys and polls to over 100 colleges, gaining insight into key elements of our app. After a 5-year period of gathering information and updating the app accordingly, we will start building for the 40-80 age range and send out polls/surveys as necessary to 1000’s of households
## Technical Stack Reasoning
To handle frontend software, Soothe will use React Native to build the core elements of the app and deliver a product to investors that will be continually updated. The backend code to process all this data/updates will be written in Java. These updates will then be going through Amazon Web Services as it not only is great at handling updates, but also for scaling our app and being able to back up those updates. Lastly, PostgreSQL will be used for our large-scale data storage. Through these different technological uses, it will be an open-source, modern, full mobile application stack. Each was chosen for a specific reason. React Native, being the frontend, is best because it is one of the most cost-efficient platforms, is open-source, has a large community outlet, and has the best user interface experience (Gupta, 2024). Since it is most compatible with Java that is why we utilize that in the backend. For our cloud data, the main choice is AWS for its high reliability and ability for global availability. Plus, Amazon is one of the highest-grossing companies with infinite possibilities on growth, making their cloud storage incomparable. Lastly, the main reason to choose PostgreSQL was similar to Amazon, where it is great in reliability and consistency but pertaining to data storage. Since Soothe will be processing an immense amount of data at a large-scale, PostgreSQL would be perfect to match. The combination of these technologies guarantees complete reliability and transparency with our customers.
## Technical Debt
Reviewing reflection 2 of the class, it is important to be aware of the technical debt that may build up when creating a project like an app. The first major step that has ensured our debt stays to a minimum is the software we are using. Since we are utilizing React Native, this is a very cost-efficient software to run for most apps while also making sure the entirety of the app runs smoothly. The main problem is the growth of the app. Increasing the infrastructure like adding personnel to the team or making major updates for app improvement, is where costs heavily increase. To combat this issue two major implementations will take place for cost effectiveness. Firstly, weekly check-ins for engineers to ensure code is thoroughly processed. By having these check-ins, we can allocate time for fixes to be created and can better support growth. Once we gain more engineers, these check-ins will be more for consistency purposes, so no extra debt is collected through the process of coding for the app.
The second implementation will be automation for higher project needs. In lecture 25, Mr. Alicea explains the need for automation and how it can help scale companies. Understanding that growth is a key factor to be uplifted out of technical debt, when Soothe finalizes phase two, is where automation can take place to help engineers keep up with constant coding updates. With the scale the app can grow to and after reaching a certain number of users, automation will allow for bigger projects to be attended to so that engineers can work on more personal bugs for users. Having automation gives the team more opportunities to work with users and make sure their feedback is heard so we can fix any problems that arise. Allowing for these weekly check-ins with engineers combined with automation, makes sure our team stays on track and we can produce enough money to handle the bandwidth that comes with the app.
## Community Governance
To establish trust with the community while following all rules, two things must be considered to thoroughly outline these guidelines. For proper governance, our app Soothe needs a clearly defined scope and written rules that users can view whenever needed. The scope will highlight all contributors to the project, which consist of the founders, team members, and investors into the project. These will be properly stated, especially with roles to the project. Since it needs to be written with clear rules they need to state a clear code of conduct for both users and developers with an emphasis on balance. Since this is an open-source network, specific rules need to be in place in regards to collaborating with the UI, code, and especially data. Clear guidelines will specify data sharing and how our app will not share any personal data with other companies or users. By combining openness and controlled oversight, while being clearly highlighted in the documents, collaboration should be at the forefront to ensure users feel safe, comfortable, and have a sense of privacy when browsing the app Soothe.
## Future Pathways and Extensions
Based on the three phases of our app creation, Soothe, here is what the next 3 years will look like to further improve the app. After concluding phase 3, the feedback was immense stating how helpful the app has been for individuals, whether they are a college student or in the work force. Based on feedback and our own personal findings, the main areas of improvement are updating features, making sure that too much debt is not accumulated, and the newest plan, integration with other technological devices. Firstly, based on feedback, our team noticed that our users want more from our app. Some additions to Soothe include a better biometrics system (related to connecting to a device), improving user dependency by providing daily notifications, infographics to understand stress levels, more personalized videos, and lastly, to help with funding, a paid monthly feature to allow you to directly talk to a therapist. While there are many updates going into the app, using a monthly subscription for therapy will significantly increase our profit margins and help us maintain the smooth, consistent operation of our app.
With consistent meetings with engineers, we can ensure each of these implementations get rolled out on a timely basis with no bugs. As each feature is added, this means more data storage is necessary, more engineers to work on the app, and a better experience needs to be created on the app for users. This means more debt is being accumulated to handle all relevant updates. Like mentioned previously, automation will be added when phase 3 ends. Having automation handle the next two years of feature implementations will ensure no more money is lost for all the extra work new engineers have to take on. While new engineers are necessary for growth, the addition of a monthly subscription will also cover all salaries for all included personnel. By continuing these weekly check-ins with a larger staff, we will allow for a more consistent workflow across the board.
Lastly, Soothe in year 3 will add an option for users to connect their smartwatch (Fitbit or Apple Watch) directly to our app. This will not only give them real-time updates straight to their wrists but will also massively improve the biometrics problem mentioned during phase 3. By looking at heart rate tracking on the phone, our team realized it was giving our users inaccurate data. By implementing the ability to connect our app to smartwatches, this allows users to track their heart rate straight from the watch. Having this accurate data will allow Soothe to notify you when your heart rate levels or even skin conductance is out of its normal range, targeting high stress levels. If they are elevated for other reasons like physical activity the app will also consist of an ignore category to easily remove the notification. This new addition to Soothe will be crucial for users to get the most up-to-date data to help manage their stress levels. Based on the levels your watch sends to the app, Soothe will automatically create recommendations the user can use to improve their levels throughout the day. Having all these new app extensions is crucial to ensuring they have the best possible experience.
## Conclusion
Soothe is a personalized stress management app made to help individuals manage their daily stressors in a positive way. Catered to college students and early-career employees, Soothe offers a wide range of features to help users reduce their overall stress and lead a more productive lifestyle. With a modern user interface, accurate biometrics tracker, stress level monitor, and personalized breathing/meditation exercises, Soothe is there for your every need to improve your mental health.
By creating a 3-phase plan, implementing important course material, and using an open-source technology stack, our team is able to present a fully operational stress management app. This app not only can manage your stress levels but can also track your heart rate and skin conductance to stay updated on your health as a whole. With Soothe, it displays how a technology that utilizes automation can be beneficial for countless people. This project also depicts the importance of human-computer interaction and how, by working with an emphasis on teamwork and collaboration, anything can be done to create a meaningful product.
## References
Bradley, A. (2025). Integrative Project Management: Funding, Economics, and Commercialization. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. 

Bulo, J. G., & Sanchez, M. G. (2014). Sources of stress among college students. CVCITC Research Journal, 1(1), 16-25.

Gupta, I. (2024, November 25). Why choose react native for mobile app development?. RipenApps. https://ripenapps.com/blog/react-native-for-mobile-app-development/ 

Nowak, K. (2023, November). When young adults preparing to enter the workforce find task support stressful: an investigation on individual differences and implications for human resource management. In Evidence-based HRM: a Global Forum for Empirical Scholarship (Vol. 11, No. 4, pp. 695-708). Emerald Publishing Limited.
